[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Can we make sense of
our physical experience
and become players in
the symphony of life?
Can we gain insights into
the fundamental formulas
of creation and grasp
the mind of God?
There are many challenges
we must face, however,
in our quest to discovering
such a worthy prize.
In this episode, we discover
what those challenges are,
the progress that has been
made in overcoming them,
and why this search for unity
is so important to our lives.
The two main pillars
of modern physics
are quantum field
theory, which deals
with microcosmic behaviors, and
general relativity, which deals
with macrocosmic behaviors.
We've all heard the
four physical forces
of gravity, electromagnetism,
and the weak and strong
nuclear forces.
Quantum mechanics
has successfully
been able to unify three
of the four forces.
But it does not explain gravity.
General relativity,
on the other hand,
explains gravity, but from
a classical physics approach
that doesn't incorporate
quantum phenomenon.
The challenge
physicists encounter
is that these two approaches
become incompatible
when dealing with very
small scales yet high mass,
such as would be
found in a black hole
or at the singularity in the
first moment of the Big Bang.
Attempts to incorporate
gravity into the standard model
of quantum physics run
up against infinities
and deep paradoxes.
This has forced
physicists to come up
with entirely new models.
Why should we care what
happens in black holes
or big-bang singularities?
How does this knowledge have
any relevance to our lives?
Well, the reason is that
this search for unity
is also the search for us to
know ourselves and our origin.
Where do we come from?
The more we can understand
our origins the more
we can understand our true self.
Only then will we
know what it takes
to tap into our full potential.
The fact that
physicists have now
started moving beyond
ordinary notions of spacetime
and material ways
of thinking in order
to find their
theory of everything
reveals that there is a deeper
underlying reality where
everything is an
unbroken wholeness.
A unity that is the source of
all phenomenon in our universe.
And to grasp this unity we need
to go through a paradigm shift
in our ways of thinking
and approaching issues.
What kinds of paradigm
shifts are happening now?
There are a couple of
themes revealing themselves
as we consider the
current leading
models that attempt
to unite quantum
physics and general relativity.
One of those recurring themes
is that spacetime, matter,
and even energy are no
longer seen as fundamental,
but, rather, as
emergent properties out
of some deeper reality.
What is meant by emergent?
The best way to describe
it is to think of water.
Water is made of H2O molecules.
Those molecules in
and of themselves
do not have the
quality of being wet.
They can be in the air
state as they evaporate,
they can also be in a frozen
and crystallized state,
or they can even feel dry.
The H2O molecules are
discrete and individualized,
yet the water appears to
be continuous, flowing,
and transparent.
All of these
properties of water are
emergent as a result of how
the H2O molecules interact
with one another at
different temperatures.
We often picture space and time
as the fundamental backdrops
to the universe, while matter
and energy are its building
blocks.
But these new models are saying
that that is not the case.
Instead, they are
just properties
that emerge as a result of
interactions taking place
within a deeper reality, just
as water's properties emerge
from the water molecules
and their interactions
with each other.
What is this deeper reality?
That is the question.
To grasp it, we have
to completely change
our notions of what is real.
Space, time, energy,
and matter are only
experiential attributes of
the deeper underlying reality,
similar to how water,
ice, or moist air
are experiential attributes
of H2O molecules interacting.
We can experience these
different emergent
states of water, but
we can't directly
experience a single H2O molecule
with our five physical senses.
We can, however, experience
it with our mind.
Due to the knowledge
gained from science
with its observational
tools, we are now
more informed about how
to visualize and imagine
a single molecule of water.
Equipped with this
knowledge, we can
use our consciousness
to interact
with its consciousness.
We have proof of this from
the work of Dr. Masaru Emoto,
who demonstrated the
impact of our thoughts,
emotions, and vibrational
state of being
and what they have upon water.
At the same time, long
before science told us
about H2O molecules,
ancient shamans, alchemists,
and mystics did have ways of
communicating and interacting
with invisible essences.
They thought of them as spirit
beings, such as elementals,
divas, and angels,
as the consciousness
behind all materia.
They might not have known
the specific shape of an H2O
molecule, for example,
but they certainly
mastered the art of conscious
communication with the elements
and how to harness their power.
As science comes closer to
understanding the deeper
reality, it can
similarly help us
to connect with it through
our mind and consciousness.
If we can use our consciousness
to properly communicate
with the deeper
reality, then we can
begin to impact how
it manifests itself
into our experiential realm.
Just like we're able
to influence the shapes
and beauty of water crystals
with our vibrational essence,
science is one part of
it, art is the other.
Science informs
us, and art is how
we use that and express
or directly interact
with consciousness.
Metaphysics is about
bringing together
both the art and
the science in order
to achieve true
mastery and awakening
of our full potential.
Now let's go back to the
other themes that show up
in the newer physics models.
What more is there?
Concepts such as
supersymmetry, superfluidity,
higher dimensions, holographic
information, coherence,
and a geometric
nature to the universe
are all being proposed.
What do all of
these things mean?
To explore that let's dive into
a few of the leading physics
models for unifying physics.
The first and most
popular models
are various string theories and
something called loop quantum
gravity.
We explore these
in other episodes,
but string theory
especially is very elegant
and it lends itself
well to correlations
with hermetic, alchemical,
and other ancient spiritual
principles.
In essence, these models say
that the fundamental components
of that deeper reality
are harmonically
vibrating strings, membranes,
or loops of braided spacetime.
But this deeper
reality can only be
found at the smallest
microcosmic scale called
the Planck scale,
which is very tiny.
This scale is far
too small for even
our most powerful detectors
and particle accelerators
to access directly.
But string theory does
make several predictions
beyond what the standard
model has already verified.
The main new predictions
include a host
of new supersymmetric
particles, which
could account for much
of the dark matter that
fills the galaxies.
They also predict that there
are 10 spatial dimensions
plus time, causing
us to consider
our multi-dimensionality.
And it tells us that the
laws of string theory
are equivalent to the
laws of harmony, which
relate to music,
sacred geometry,
and what creates
beauty in our world.
These are some of the
things that I personally
love about string theory
and do hope that they
will be verified one day.
String theory also plays a
role in the holographic model
explored in other episodes.
It says the vibrations
of these strings
create waves or ripples
in the quantum sea.
As those waves combine, they
create interference patterns
that contain information.
This information is encoded
upon the surface of the quantum
vacuum within the
zero point field.
It's the information
patterns that
govern the formation
of our universe
as well as the types
of particles and forces
that can be manifested.
Some scientists have
delved even deeper
into this analogy of
the quantum vacuum
as being like a vast ocean.
If particles are more
like waves traveling
upon the surface of the
sea, and if spacetime
is analogous to a
liquid, then physicists
say it must be more like a
superfluid, one that does not
impose any kind of friction,
limitation, or dampening
of the movement of those waves.
Now what does that mean?
Well, it means that the
essence of the quantum vacuum
is not physical, at
least in the ways
that we're usually
thinking of it.
Or we might also say that
spacetime does not actually
impose any limitations when
we connect with that deeper
reality.
The final scientific
approach to unifying physics
that is really worth exploring
is one that is relatively new.
In 2013, physicists
from the Institute
of Advanced Studies
in New Jersey
published their findings of
a new mathematical object
they call the amplituhedron.
In essence, it is a
multi-dimensional series
of interconnected
polyhedra, and it
looks like an intricate jewel
of higher dimensionality.
The simplest version of it
consists of four tetrahedra
connected by their faces.
This shape does not actually
exist in physical space.
Rather, it is a purely abstract
object that exists only
in a mathematical space.
It allows scientists to
model particle interactions
in a much simpler way.
And there is not just one
amplituhedron, but many,
each depending on
the various particles
interacting and all
the different ways
that they can interact.
These dictate the
dimensionality and facets
of that geometrical jewel.
What used to take thousands
of equations and Feynman
diagrams can now be done in a
simple one-line formula that
just calculates the volume
of the underlying geometry.
So what does this mean?
Well, it points to a geometrical
basis to the universe.
This is what I personally
love about this approach.
In addition to its
paradigm-shifting perspective,
it says that geometry
underlies everything.
Now this idea is not
new to those of us who
study sacred geometry,
which dates back
far beyond the
Pythagorean mystery school
and to ancient Egypt and beyond.
But what is great about this
is that science is again
catching up with what ancient
metaphysical teachings have
been saying for millennia.
Sacred geometry governs
the true building blocks
and fabric of our universe.
This model is peering into
an entirely different world,
one of pure number and
geometry rather than
one based in spacetime
and quantum probabilities.
It threw those
assumptions out the window
and stepped into an
entirely different mindset.
One of the reasons that
most attempts to find
a quantum gravity
have failed thus far
is that they run into this
issue with two core assumptions
that physicists make
about our universe.
These are known as unitarity
and locality, and both of them
are based on old
materialistic paradigms.
Unitarity means that all quantum
probabilities for a given
set of particle
interactions must add to 1,
similar to how we
add percentages
until we get to 100%.
But this assumption
breaks down when gravity
gets involved at small scales.
Locality, on the
other hand, assumes
that particles can only interact
through proximity in spacetime.
But we know from entanglement
that this is not entirely true,
and, again, it breaks down for
quantum gravity situations.
The failure of these
assumptions suggests
that physics needs to be
reformulated without either
of those old principles.
And this is exactly what the
amplituhedron approach does.
By doing so, it
suggests that there
is a coherent geometrical
structure at the foundation
of the universe, while spacetime
locality and unitary of quantum
probabilities are emergent
phenomenon that are
a consequence of the geometry.
In other words, the
existence of spacetime
and the particle interactions
that take place within it
are a result of geometry.
Geometry of what?
What is it made of?
Well, the basic
idea is that it's
made of something
like rays of light
called twisters that exist in
a purely mathematical space.
And what this reminds me of are
the rays of creation discussed
in other episodes that
come from the Ein Sof,
the infinite source prior
to our physical universe
coming into being, meaning
they originate somewhere beyond
or transcendent to our
physical spacetime universe.
Could scientists finally be
tapping into the mathematics
that reveals the
secrets of the Old One,
as Einstein would have put it?
That remains to be seen.
I believe they're
getting closer,
but they are still
missing key components.
Before we get into that,
there is one final thing
on the amplituhedron
idea to explore.
The physicists
working on this model
believe that they have
discovered a master
amplituhedron.
Well what does that mean?
How is it any different?
It was mentioned
before that there
are many of these
geometric objects
because there are many ways
in which particles interact.
Physicists now believe that
all those specific amplituhedra
are simply facets on the surface
of a more all encompassing
master structure.
This master structure would have
an infinite number of facets,
kind of like how a circle has
an infinite number of sides,
only this structure is much
more multi-dimensional.
The volume of this
master structure
would then theoretically give us
the total probability amplitude
of all physical processes
allowed in the universe.
It would be like their
Philosopher's Stone.
It could explain why our
physical universe appears
to exist, why we only experience
three dimensions of space,
why time appears to
only move forward,
and why spacetime
appears at all,
and how the Big Bang
and cosmology arose out
of pure geometry.
If this model or another one
similar to it proves correct,
then it will confirm that
spacetime is illusory,
and it will lead to a
profound shift in paradigm.
This master geometric
structure would
be of infinite dimensionality,
but that dimensionality is not
in spacetime.
Rather, it is in an abstract
realm of pure numbers.
While all phenomenon, such as
spacetime, separate forces,
particle interactions, and
even our earthly lives,
are simply emergent properties
from a deeper infinite
wholeness.
The changes we experience
in this physical realm
arise from the structure, the
different facets of that master
geometry, as it
moves and rotates
in the quantum sea
of the multiverse.
But the object itself is
changeless and timeless.
I just love this because
it relates to the mystery
teachings on how the
spiritual realms interact
with our physical realm.
Before we get into that,
there is one caveat
to say in regards to this
amplituhedron model, which
is that so far it is based
on a simplified supersymmetry
model that doesn't actually
describe real physics.
So we haven't found a valid
theory of quantum gravity yet,
but physicists think there could
be a related geometric object
that will work.
The question is, what
geometry will be the key?
Let's now explore some mystery
teachings on this topic.
Nikola Tesla, the great
inventor who is an initiate,
said, "if you want to find
the secrets of the universe,
think in terms of energy,
frequency, and vibration."
He lived his life
applying things
like numerology and sacred
geometry to all he did,
such as repeating
everything in sets of three.
He said, "if you only knew
the magnificence of the 3, 6,
and 9, then you would have
the keys to the universe."
Why did Tesla make
claims like these?
What's so special about
frequency, vibration, numbers,
and sacred geometry?
Kabbalah works deeply
with these things
as the fundamental building
blocks of all creation.
The Sepher Yetzirah, the
Kabbalistic Book of Formation,
opens with a secret
wisdom teaching
that says God, or a
divine creative source,
engraved his name by three
seraphim, numbers, letters,
and sounds.
And the word seraphim
means mighty angel.
So right away we're being
taught that numbers, letters,
and sounds are angelic
or spiritual forces.
It then goes on to
describe these further.
It says 10 are the
ineffable sefirot,
meaning the essence of
the numbers 1 through 10.
Then 22 are the
letters, which it calls
the foundation of all things.
And these are grouped into
three mothers, seven doubles,
and 12 simple letters.
All together, these 10
sefirot and 22 letters
form what are called the 32
wonderful paths of wisdom.
Now what are the
Kabbalists telling us?
Right away, they are saying
how important numbers
are as fundamental building
blocks of creation.
The divine uses
numbers to create.
But hold on.
What is meant by numbers?
The sefirot out are
not ordinary numbers
in the dry mathematical sense.
Rather, each number represents
a frequency, or, we could say,
a ray of creation.
These numbers are alive,
conscious, purpose-driven
spiritual light,
or rays of creation
that emanate from the source.
Each number contains volumes
worth of information within it,
and each one represents
an essential aspect
of divine source.
The 10 sefirot,
the first 10 rays,
are arranged in the
pattern of the tree of life
in the order of the
lightning flash.
But the divine building
blocks are not only numbers.
It's also letters.
What is meant by letters here?
Well, in Kabbalah, every letter
has a corresponding number
as its foundational essence.
But the letters then
take things further.
The letters form patterns.
A number is like a pure
singular frequency,
while a letter is a
pattern shaped out
of a combination of frequencies.
Perhaps it's like how when two
waves of different frequencies
combine they form an
interference pattern that
shapes a letter.
So a letter is in essence a
pure geometric arrangement
of energy.
Is this starting
to sound familiar?
Could we compare each letter
to a specific amplituhedron?
If we were to use this
analogy, let's then
take it a bit further.
Remember how the physicists talk
about a master amplituhedron
as being somewhat equivalent
to a circle, where all lesser
amplituhedra sit on the surface
facets of that master geometry?
Well, in a similar way,
the Sepher Yetzirah
talks about how all 22
letters are arranged
as if upon a sphere.
Each letter is then
combined or connected
with all the other letters,
forming pairs of letters.
This produces what is called
the 231 gates of knowledge,
or we could say information.
Although knowledge is really
a better word because it
implies intelligence.
This master structure of the
231 gates can then be rotated.
When it is rotated
forward or clockwise
it leads to good and
pleasurable things.
But when it is rotated
backwards or counterclockwise
we are told that it leads
to evil and torment.
This reveals to us that
forward or clockwise
is aligned with the
will to do good,
while backward or
counterclockwise is
against that will.
One simple way to apply
this is to train ourselves
to draw or write our
zeros and Os clockwise
with the intent of aligning with
the forward flow or the will
to do good.
Try it out, and pay attention
to how you draw circles.
Another important
key to the letters
is that they all represent
a transformational process.
When we look at the tree
of life each path or letter
connects two spheres.
The spheres, or the numbers, are
considered as states of being,
while the paths,
or the letters, are
more like states of becoming.
They are a transformation from
one state of being to another.
So the letters could be akin
to the dynamics of interaction
between particles, which are
more like states of being.
This would match up
again with the idea
of the amplituhedron, which is
based on particle interactions.
There is a reason why so many
ancient mystery traditions put
a lot of emphasis on
learning to read and write
ancient languages and
magical alphabets.
Good examples of this are
ancient Hebrew, Sanskrit,
and Japanese kanji,
all of which are
said to be among the few
remaining ancient languages we
still really understand
that were derived from what
are called the fire letters,
or the original language
of creation.
As we can also see
by now, the formation
of both the tree of
life and the 231 gates,
which are based
upon the letters,
give us a variety of
sacred geometries.
As the pure frequencies of the
numbers combine or intersect,
it gives the letters.
And then, as these combine
again in various ways,
it results in sacred geometries.
Within these master patterns we
can find all sacred geometries.
Just start connecting
the dots and we'll
find all the
fundamental patterns
our universe is built on.
And so the Sepher Yetzirah
says that from nothingness
the source Ein Sof
made something.
From nothing comes something.
From the empty void is
made the material world,
using these numbers,
letters, and sounds.
Let's explore sounds now.
How do they fit in?
Well, sounds are vibration.
The inner essence
of a letter is based
on numbers or frequencies.
But the outer
expression of letters
produces sound or vibrations.
We know from the research of
Swiss scientist Dr. Hans Jenny
and many others who followed
in his footsteps, when
the right sounds are
exposed to certain materia,
such as water, clay, or
sand, it shapes that materia
into sacred geometric patterns.
He called this research
cymatics, or the study
of wave phenomenon.
But what is meant
by the right sounds?
Well, it means a
sound or vibration
that is resonant with
that particular materia.
Vibrational resonance
is one of the principles
that Nikola Tesla used in
his various inventions.
Resonance implies the
laws of harmony and music.
These laws have to
do with ratios or how
one frequency relates
to another, whether they
harmonize or not.
For example, in the standard
musical scale of an octave,
there are eighth notes.
Do, re, mi, fa,
so, la, ti, and do.
That next do, the eighth note,
is actually the first note
on the next octave higher.
So the second do is a higher
harmonic of the first.
This is a one to eight
ratio, the first note
and the eighth
note in an octave.
Although, in terms
of frequency, it is
double the rate of vibration.
The other way we
can get harmony,
besides going up an
octave, is to use
what is called the
perfect fifth in music.
That is to take the
fifth note, the so chord,
and combine it with the eighth.
This is a five to
eight ratio, which
is what we call a golden ratio.
What is a golden ratio?
It relates to the
Fibonacci sequence.
Starting with the basic
binary of 0 and 1,
and then all other
numbers in this sequence
derive from adding the two
numbers that preceded it.
But what's most interesting
about this sequence is
that when we take the ratio
of any two sequential numbers
it begins to converge to what
is known as the phi ratio,
or golden ratio, of
1.618 dot, dot, dot.
Notice that the 5 to 8 ratio
is in this Fibonacci sequence.
This golden ratio shows up
all over nature in the cosmos,
from the way that plants
grow to the proportions
of our own bodies to
the golden spirals
we see in shells, flowers, pine
cones, ferns, even all the way
up to spiral galaxies.
The beauty of it is that
the same ratios that
govern the laws of
harmony and music
also govern the laws
of sacred geometry.
Returning to cymatics
for a moment,
Hans Jenny mostly studied the
effects of pure frequencies
on various materia.
But there were a
few studies he did
that combined different
frequencies, such as
might be associated with the
sounds of different letter
combinations from Kabbalah.
Letters combine to form words.
In many spiritual traditions,
certain divine names or words
of power are used as
mantras and chants.
For example, Kabbalah talks
about the various names of God,
such as the yud-hey-vav-hey
or the Tetragrammaton,
as being more like
formulas for creation.
While in Sanskrit, ohm is said
to be the primordial sound
of creation.
Some have even claimed
that when ohm is properly
intoned across a
plate of sand it
will shape the sand into
what looks like a Sri Yantra.
It's possible.
But without a doubt,
the vibrational energy
of sound moves and
organizes matter.
We can imagine that if either
spacetime or the quantum sea
is a superfluid, then
vibration of divine names
or words of power
shape that superfluid
into sacred geometric patterns,
like we see in cymatics.
This is one way that the
higher rays of creation,
such as numbers and letters,
can make the transition
from the realm of pure spirit
into the realm of physicality.
The final missing key in physics
models that we've discussed
is consciousness,
the spirit which
resides in non-physical realms.
The hermetic
principle of mentalism
that consciousness, or mind,
is primary must be included.
So long as scientists
remain rigidly opposed
to bringing consciousness into
their grand unified theories,
they will fail to find a
true theory of everything.
As Tesla said, "the
day science begins
to study non-physical
phenomena, it
will make more
progress in one decade
than in all the previous
centuries of existence."
The newer physics models
based on geometry and laws
of vibrational harmony
start to approach
this, especially when these
are combined with Kabbalistic
and other metaphysical wisdoms.
But how does all of this
apply to us and our lives?
With these
understandings, we become
empowered to use
our consciousness
to properly communicate
with deeper reality.
By doing so, we can
impact how it manifests
in our experiential realm.
We and everything around us
are made of numbers, letters,
sounds, and sacred geometries.
As we learn the true
underlying meaning and essence
of each of these building
blocks, as well as properly
tune our instruments, which
is our body, mind, and soul,
we can then use
these tools, as well.
This is something
Kabbalah and other mystery
teachings have developed deep
arts and sciences around.
We can learn to apply
them in magical ways
to enter into a co-creative
relationship with the universe
and source.
One of the big
keys to doing this
correctly is by properly
tuning ourselves
to the higher energies
of spirit consciousness.
Kabbalah talks about
ascending and descending
the tree of life.
From the physical world of
diversity that we are in,
we strive to ascend back
to the unity with source.
Simultaneously, spirit
seeks to express itself
into the world of matter
by descending the tree.
Kabbalah also teaches that the
best way to align with source
and feel that
connection in our lives
is to live in the middle pillar.
Well, what does that mean?
At the top of the
middle pillar is unity.
For us, this means being aware
that we are one with all.
The next step down
the middle pillar
is about hidden
knowledge and revealing
the connection between the
physical and spiritual realms.
The center is about expressing
and recognizing beauty
in all things great and small.
Then we come to the
foundation, which
is about grasping how the
laws of the universe work.
And at the very practical level,
patterning our daily lives
through what we
think, say, and do
to be aligned and in
the flow with those laws
of the universe.
Finally, at the bottom
of the middle pillar
is the physical kingdom
in which we live, move,
and have our experience
of being embodied.
We are here so that
we can learn the art
and science of manifesting our
full potential into this world.
We are eternal spirit beings
having a physical experience,
not the other way around.
When we can truly
grasp this wisdom,
that is when our entire paradigm
of how we live in this world
will completely shift,
making life so much more
fun and full of true joy.
Why is all this important?
The search for unity,
knowledge, beauty, foundation,
and understanding life
in the physical world
is the search of both physicists
and metaphysicists alike.
It helps us to make sense
of this grand experience
that we are all a part of.
It can bring us meaning
and clarity of purpose.
It can also help us
to learn to harness
the potentials available
to us and hopefully
use them to transform our lives
and our world into better ones.
As we do, our
transformation sends ripples
throughout the cosmos
because we are the cosmos.
We are entangled with every
part of this universe.
So, yes, our efforts
for growth and expansion
do matter in ways far beyond
what most of us realize.
When we learn to become
players in the cosmic orchestra
and pluck the
strings of creation
to make beautiful
music, that is when
we will earn our rightful place
in this grand play of life.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of the universe with me in this
episode of "Mystery Teachings."
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]